Week 6 Project Guide
Probabilistic Models & Bayesian Inference
Role Requirements · Notebook Walkthrough · Submission Guide
Statistical Machine Learning · Fusemachines AI Fellowship · Susan Ghimire
How to use this document: Read the Your Role section first — it sets the business context for every decision you will
make in the notebook. Then work through the Notebook Walkthrough section by section. Before you submit, run
through the Completion Checklist and the Submission Requirements to make sure nothing is missing. All links in
this document are clickable.
1 YOUR ROLE
The business scenario you are operating in for this entire assignment
You are the Data Scientist who deployed last week's XGBoost churn model. Three weeks in, the VP of
Retention flags two concerns: (1) “When you say a customer has a 73% churn probability — what is the margin of
error on that number?” and (2) “We just launched a new contract tier with only 40 customers enrolled. Your model
has never seen this segment — how far should I trust its output?”
Responsibility
Replace point estimates
Quantify sequential
evidence
Model feature
dependencies
Forecast with honest
uncertainty
Validate a Bayesian
posterior
What it means in practice
Parts 1–2: compute MLE, MAP, and full posteriors for churn rate by contract type. Report
94% HDI — not a single number.
Part 2: implement update_posterior() and show the VP exactly how many customers are
needed before the inference is reliable.
Parts 3–4: fit a Multivariate Gaussian, a Bayesian Network, and a Markov Random Field
(MRF) to the same Telco features, and explain what each tells you that a single coefficient
cannot.
Part 5: fit a GP to Mauna Loa CO and define the model confidence boundary — the
2horizon at which the 95% credible band exceeds 5 ppm.
Part 6: build a Bayesian Logistic Regression using PyMC/NUTS, diagnose convergence
via R-hat and ESS, compare the posterior to the frequentist MLE, and save the fitted trace
as a .pkl artefact.
Key challenge: These are not just modelling exercises. Each part answers one of the VP's two questions directly: (1)
uncertainty quantification on point estimates, and (2) reliability of inference on small segments. A model that gives you
a number without a distribution is giving you an incomplete answer — this week you replace every such number with a
posterior.
2 DATASETS
Two datasets, six parts — no new EDA required for Telco
Dataset
Telco Customer
Churn
Mauna Loa CO2
(monthly mean)
Source
Kaggle
statsmodels
built-in
Used in
Parts 1, 2,
3, 4, 6
Part 5 only
Notes
7,043 rows · 21 cols · same CSV from Week 5. No new EDA
— focus is on probabilistic methods.
521 months (1958–2001) · zero download · 3 lines to load. No
CSV, no Kaggle.
Mauna Loa data loading (3 lines — no CSV):
from statsmodels.datasets import co2
df = co2.load_pandas().data.resample('ME').mean().dropna()
t = (df.index - df.index[0]).days.values.reshape(-1, 1) / 365.25
y = df['co2'].values
Design rationale: Telco carries the business narrative across five of six parts — students already know the data, so
cognitive load stays on the probabilistic concepts. Mauna Loa is used only for the GP section because it has the exact
structure GPs are designed for: a continuous temporal signal with trend, seasonality, and measurement noise that
requires composite kernel engineering and produces visually dramatic uncertainty bands on extrapolation.
3 HOW TO USE THE NOTEBOOK
Step-by-step guide for opening, running, and completing the assignment
• Open the notebook shared with you in Google Classroom and load it in Google Colab.
• Run the setup cell first to install all required packages (pymc, arviz, pgmpy, scikit-learn, statsmodels,
scipy). This takes ~3 minutes on a fresh runtime.
• Work through Parts 1–6 in order — each part's outputs feed into later parts.
• When done, submit the completed notebook (.ipynb), the saved PyMC trace (telco_bayes_lr_v1.pkl), and
your one-page reflection back through Google Classroom.
4 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Exactly what to submit, how, and what will be checked
4.1 Files to Submit
File
W6_Probabilistic_Models_
Assignment.ipynb
telco_bayes_lr_v1.pkl
Reflection PDF or .md (≤ 1
page)
Description
 Required?
Your completed assignment notebook. Must be fully executed —
all cells run top-to-bottom with all outputs, posterior plots,
credible-band plots, and trace plots visible. All SELF-CHECK cells
pass. All ✍ Reflect cells filled in.
✓
Required
The fitted PyMC InferenceData trace saved using pickle.dump().
Must load without errors using pickle.load() and contain all
sampled chains. This mirrors Week 5's joblib serialisation habit —
probabilistic models have artefacts too.
✓
Required
Answer in your own words: 'Give one concrete example from this
assignment where the fully Bayesian answer would have changed
a decision you might have made using only the MLE or a p-value.
Explain the mechanism — was it prior information, uncertainty
quantification, sequential updating, or the Bayesian-vs-frequentist
comparison?'
✓
Required
4.2 Notebook Quality Standards
• All cells are executed in order from top to bottom — no skipped cells, no cells with errors in the output.
• Every # YOUR CODE HERE has been replaced with working code.
• Every ✍ Reflect markdown cell contains your own reasoning — not a copy-paste from the session notebook or
an AI-generated answer.
• All SELF-CHECK assert cells pass without errors.
• Trace plots (az.plot_trace) are visible for Part 6 — not empty axes.
• The Part 6 prior-sensitivity overlay (Q20) and the Bayesian 94% HDI vs. frequentist (sklearn) MLE comparison
(Q21) are visible, with specific numeric values stated.
• Posterior HDI intervals are reported with specific numeric values — no placeholder text.
• Code is clean and readable — no commented-out dead code blocks left behind.
Do not submit: The raw CSV data file (too large), the session solution notebook, any .pyc files or __pycache__
directories, or files generated by Jupyter checkpoints (.ipynb_checkpoints/). The .pkl trace file is the only binary artefact
— do not submit joblib files from Week 5 again.
5 COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID
Patterns that cause lost marks or incorrect results
✗ Not scaling features before NUTS sampling (Part 6)
PyMC's NUTS sampler assumes the posterior geometry is roughly spherical. Unscaled continuous features (tenure
in months, MonthlyCharges in dollars) create elongated, highly anisotropic geometries that the sampler traverses
very slowly — resulting in high autocorrelation, low ESS, and divergent transitions. Always scale to zero mean / unit
variance using training-set statistics only before passing features to the model.
✗ Choosing uninformative flat priors for logistic regression (Part 6)
pm.Flat() on logistic regression coefficients creates an improper posterior — NUTS will diverge or produce
nonsensical samples. Use weakly informative priors: Normal(0, 2) for β coefficients and Normal(0, 5) for the
intercept. These encode 'most coefficients are between −4 and +4 on the log-odds scale' while remaining dominated
by the data at n≈5,000.
✗ Ignoring R-hat > 1.01 or bulk-ESS < 400 (Part 6)
Reporting results from a non-converged chain is equivalent to reporting a model trained on corrupted data. If any
parameter has R-hat > 1.01, do not proceed to posterior analysis. Investigate the trace plot, check for divergences,
consider increasing target_accept or re-scaling features. ESS < 400 means your HDI estimate has high uncertainty
itself.
✗ Reporting MLE or MAP as 'the Bayesian answer' (Parts 1–2)
MLE and MAP are both point estimates. The fully Bayesian answer is the entire posterior distribution — plot it, report
the HDI, and use Monte Carlo to answer P(θ_A > θ_B). Reflecting only on the MAP estimate for Q1 will lose marks:
the point of the exercise is the overlap (or non-overlap) of the full posteriors.
✗ Using the wrong marginalisation formula (Part 3)
To marginalise out TotalCharges from the 3D covariance matrix, you simply extract the 2×2 upper-left submatrix of
Σ_{3D}. Do not re-fit a new 2D Gaussian — analytically marginalising means taking the corresponding block of the
covariance. Verify that the result matches the directly fitted 2D Σ as a numerical check.
✗ Writing generic Reflect answers
Answers like 'the posterior gave more information' or 'the GP had uncertainty bands' earn no marks. Reflect answers
must be specific: quote the numeric HDI, name the feature, cite the R-hat value, identify the exact n at which the
decision threshold was crossed. E.g. 'At n=87 the posterior P(θ>0.25) first exceeded 0.90 — 43 observations earlier
than the frequentist z-test sample size of 130 would have required.'
Remember: The combination of correct code + written reasoning is what separates a model that informs decisions
from one that sits in a notebook. A perfect MCMC trace with empty Reflect cells will not pass. A thoughtful reflection
connecting the HDI to the VP's actual question — even with a minor code bug — is much better.
Week 6 · Probabilistic Models & Bayesian Inference · Fusemachines AI Fellowship | Facilitator: Susan Ghimire | Datasets: Telco
Customer Churn · Mauna Loa CO2
